Each of the hair follicles on your body
is connected to glands that secrete
an oily substance to lubricate
your skin and hair.
To do that the substance, known as sebum,
needs to move up the hair shaft
and out the opening of the follicle.
But sometimes the sebum acts
almost like a glue to dead cells
being shed by the skin.
Together, they form a soft plug
that blocks the shaft,
while the sebaceous glands
continue to produce sebum.
The growing blockage can
stimulate local bacteria like
staphylococcus to reproduce.
Increasing bacteria leads to a
response by the immune system.
A pimple is the visible
evidence of this process
white pus formed from sebum and
dead cells and bacteria,
and redness from inflammation
as the immune system tries to
kill the bacteria and heal the tissue.